**Chapter 1 Why Scala?**


This chapter covers
- What Scala is
- High-level features of the Scala language
- Why you should pick Scala as your next language


Which languages are ready for mainstream development? Among the heap of programming languages like *Kotlin, Groovy, Ruby, Clojure, Erlang*, and *F#*, why should you learn Scala?

# What’s Scala?

Scala is a general-purpose programming language designed to express common programming patterns in a concise, elegant, and type-safe way. It smoothly integrates features of object-oriented and functional programming languages, enabling programmers to be more productive.

## Scala as an object-oriented language
Object orientation helps to provide structure to your application using classes and objects.

What makes a language purely object-oriented? Most will agree a pure object-oriented language should have the following characteristics:

- Encapsulation/information hiding.
- Inheritance.
- Polymorphism/dynamic binding.
- All predefined types are objects.
- All operations are performed by sending messages to objects.
- All user-defined types are objects.

    Scala supports all these qualities and uses a pure object-oriented model similar to that of *__Smalltalk__*.


Along with the pure object-oriented features, Scala has made some innovations on OOP space:
- Modular mixin composition
- Self-type
- Type abstraction


## Scala as a functional language

*Functional programming* is a programming paradigm that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data.


Now let’s talk about functional programming languages. Functional programming languages that support this style of programming provide at least some of the following features:

- Higher-order functions (chapter 4)
- Lexical closures (chapter 3)
- Pattern matching (chapters 2 and 3)
- Single assignment (chapter 2)
- Lazy evaluation (chapter 2)
- Type inference (chapter 2)
- Tail call optimization (chapter 5)
- List comprehensions (chapters 2 and 4)
- Mondadic effects (chapter 5)


In Scala you can assign a function `(x: Int) => x + 1` to a val `inc` and use that to invoke that function:
```scala
scala> var inc = (x:Int) => x + 1
inc: Int => Int = $$Lambda$1807/1958242673@1f9d4b0e

scala> inc(1)
res2: Int = 2
```


In the following example you’ll see how to pass functions as parameters to another function and get the result:
```scala
scala> List(1, 2, 3).map((x: Int) => x + 1)
res3: List[Int] = List(2, 3, 4)
```

## Scala as a multi-paradigm language
